For us who Nurse, our Nursing is a thing, which, unless in it we are
making _progress_ every year, every month, every week, take my word for
it we are going _back_.

The more experience we gain, the more progress we can make. The progress
you make in your year’s training with us is as nothing to what you must
make every year _after_ your year’s training is over.

A woman who thinks in herself: “Now I am a ‘full’ Nurse, a ‘skilled’
Nurse, I have learnt all that there is to be learnt”: take my word for
it, she does not know _what a Nurse is_, and she never _will_ know; she
is _gone_ back already.

Conceit and Nursing cannot exist in the same person, any more than new
patches on an old garment.

Every year of her service a good Nurse will say: “I learn something
every day.”

I have had more experience in all countries and in different ways of
Hospitals than almost any one ever had before (there were no
opportunities for learning in _my_ youth such as you have had); but if I
could recover strength so much as to walk about, I would begin all over
again. I would come for a year’s training to St. Thomas’ Hospital under
your admirable Matron (and I venture to add that she would find me the
closest in obedience to all our rules), sure that I should learn every
day, learn all the more for my past experience.

And then I would try to be learning every day to the last hour of my
life. “And when his legs were cuttit off, He fought upon his stumps,”
says the ballad; so, when I could no longer learn by nursing others, I
would learn by being nursed, by seeing Nurses practise upon _me_. It is
all experience.

Agnes Jones, who died as Matron of the Liverpool Workhouse Infirmary
(whom you may have heard of as “Una”), wrote from the Workhouse in the
last year of her life: “I mean to stay at this post forty years, God
willing; but I must come back to St. Thomas’ as soon as I have a
holiday; I shall learn so much more” (she had been a year at St.
Thomas’) “now that I have more experience.”

When I was a child, I remember reading that Sir Isaac Newton, who was,
as you know, perhaps the greatest discoverer among the Stars and the
Earth’s wonders who ever lived, said in his last hours: “I seem to
myself like a child who has been playing with a few pebbles on the
sea-shore, leaving unsearched all the wonders of the great Ocean
beyond.”

By the side of this put a Nurse leaving her Training School and
reckoning up what she has learnt, ending with--“The only wonder is that
one head can contain it all.” (What a small head it must be then!)

I seem to have remembered all through life Sir Isaac Newton’s words.

And to nurse--that is, under Doctor’s orders, to cure or to prevent
sickness and maiming, Surgical and Medical,--is a field, a road, of
which one may safely say: There is no end-no end in what we may be
learning every day.[2]

I have sometimes heard: “But have we not reason to be conceited, when we
compare ourselves to ... and ...?” (naming drinking, immoral, careless,
dishonest Nurses). I will not think it possible that such things can
ever be said among _us_. Taking it even upon the worldly ground, what
woman among us, instead of looking to that which is higher, will of her
own accord compare herself with that which is lower--with immoral women?

Does not the Apostle say: “I count not myself to have apprehended: but
this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, _and
reaching forth unto those things which are before, I press toward_ the
mark for the prize of the _high calling_ of God in Christ Jesus”; and
what higher “calling” can we have than Nursing? But then we must “press
forward”; we have indeed _not_ “apprehended” if we have not
“apprehended” even so much as this.

There is a little story about “the Pharisee” known over all Christendom.
Should Christ come again upon the earth, would He have to apply that
parable to us?

And now, let me say a thing which I am sure must have been in all your
minds before this: if, unless we improve every day in our Nursing, we
are going back: how much more must it be, that, unless we improve every
day in our conduct as Christian women, followers of Him by whose name we
call ourselves, we shall be going back?

This applies of course to every woman in the world; but it applies more
especially to us, because we know no one calling in the world, except it
be that of teaching, in which _what we can do_ depends so much upon
_what we are_. To be _a good Nurse_ one must be _a good woman_; or one
is truly nothing but a tinkling bell. To be a good woman at all, one
must be an improving woman; for stagnant waters sooner or later, and
stagnant air, as we know ourselves, always grow corrupt and unfit for
use.

Is any one of us a _stagnant woman_? Let it not have to be said by any
one of us: I left this Home a worse woman than I came into it. I came in
with earnest purpose, and now I think of little but my own satisfaction
and a good place.

When the head and the hands are very full, as in Nursing, it is so easy,
so very easy, if the heart has not an earnest purpose for God and our
neighbour, to end in doing one’s work only for oneself, and not at
all--even when we seem to be serving our neighbours--not at all for them
or for God.

I should hardly like to talk of a subject which, after all, must be very
much between each one of us and her God,--which is hardly a matter for
_talk_ at all, and certainly not for me, who cannot be among you (though
there is nothing in the world I should so dearly wish), but that I
thought perhaps you might like to hear of things which persons in the
same situation, that is, in different Training Schools on the Continent,
have said to me.

I will mention two or three:

1. One said, “The greatest help I ever had in life was that we were
taught in our Training School always to raise our hearts to God the
first thing on waking in the morning.”

Now it need hardly be said that we cannot make a rule for this; a rule
will not teach this, any more than making a rule that the chimney shall
not smoke will make the smoke go up the chimney.

If we occupy ourselves the last thing at night with rushing about,
gossiping in one another’s rooms; if our last thoughts at night are of
some slight against ourselves, or spite against another, or about each
other’s tempers, it is needless to say that our first thoughts in the
morning will not be of God.

Perhaps there may even have been some quarrel; and if those who pretend
to be educated women indulge in these irreligious uneducated disputes,
what a scandal before those less educated, to whom an example, not a
stone of offence, should be set!

“A thousand irreligious cursed hours” (as some poet says), have not
seldom, in the lives of all but a few whom we may truly call Saints upon
earth, been spent on some feeling of ill-will. And can we expect to be
really able to lift up our hearts the first thing in the morning to the
God of “good will towards men” if we do this?

I speak for myself, even more perhaps than for others.

2. Another woman[3] once said to me:--“I was taught in my Training
School never to have those long inward discussions with myself, those
interminable conversations inside myself, which make up so much more of
our own thoughts than we are aware. If it was something about my duties,
I went straight to my Superiors, and asked for leave or advice; if it
was any of those useless or ill-tempered thoughts about one another, or
those that were put over us, we were taught to lay them before God and
get the better of them, before they got the better of us.”

A spark can be put out while it is a spark, if it falls on our dress,
but not when it has set the whole dress in flames. So it is with an
ill-tempered thought against another. And who will tell how much of our
thoughts these occupy?

I suppose, of course, that those who think themselves better than others
are bent upon setting them a better example.


II

And this brings me to something else. (I can always correct others
though I cannot always correct myself.) It is about jealousies and
punctilios as to ranks, classes, and offices, when employed in one good
work. What an injury this jealous woman is doing, not to others, or not
to others so much as to herself; she is doing it to herself! She is not
getting out of her work the advantage, the improvement to her own
character, the nobleness (for to be useful is the only true nobleness)
which God has appointed her that work to attain. She is not getting out
of her work what God has given it her for; but just the contrary.

(Nurses are not children, but women; and if they can’t do this for
themselves, no one can for them.)

I think it is one of Shakespeare’s heroes who says “I laboured to be
wretched.” How true that is! How true it is of some people all their
lives; and perhaps there is not one of us who could not say it with
truth of herself at one time or other: I laboured to be mean and
contemptible and small and ill-tempered, by being revengeful of petty
slights.

A woman once said: “What signifies it to me that this one does me an
injury or the other speaks ill of me, if I do not deserve it? The injury
strikes God before it strikes me, and if He forgives it, why should not
I? I hope I love Him better than I do myself.” This may sound fanciful;
but is there not truth in it?

What a privilege it is, the work that God has given us Nurses to do, if
we will only let Him have His own way with us--a greater privilege to
my mind than He has given to any woman (except to those who are
teachers), because _we_ can always be useful, always “ministering” to
others, real followers of Him who said that He came “not to be
ministered unto” but to minister. Cannot we fancy Him saying to _us_, If
any one thinks herself greater among you, let her minister unto others.

This is not to say that we are to be doing other people’s work. Quite
the reverse. The very essence of all good organisation is that everybody
should do her (or his) own work in such a way as to help and not to
hinder every one else’s work.

But this being arranged, that any one should say, I am “put upon” by
having to associate with so-and-so; or by _not_ having so-and-so to
associate with; or, by not having such a post; or, by having such a
post; or, by my Superiors “walking upon me,” or, “dancing” upon me (you
may laugh, but such things have actually been said), or etc.,
etc.,--this is simply making the peace of God impossible, the call of
God (for in all work He calls us) of none effect; it is grieving the
Spirit of God; it is doing our best to make all free-will associations
intolerable.

In “Religious Orders” this is provided against by enforcing blind,
unconditional obedience through the fears and promises of a Church.

Does it not seem to you that the greater freedom of secular Nursing
Institutions, as it requires (or ought to require) greater individual
responsibility, greater self-command in each one, greater nobleness in
each, greater _self-possession_ in _patience_--so, that very need of
self-possession, of greater nobleness in each, requires (or ought to
require) greater thought in each, more discretion, and higher, not less,
obedience? For the obedience of intelligence, not the obedience of
slavery, is what _we_ want.

The slave obeys with stupid obedience, with deceitful evasion of
service, or with careless eye service. Now, we cannot suppose God to be
satisfied or pleased with stupidity and carelessness. The free woman in
Christ obeys, or rather _seconds_ all the rules, all the orders given
her, with intelligence, with all her heart, and with all her strength,
and with all her _mind_.

“Not slothful in business; fervent in spirit, serving the Lord.”

And you who have to be Head Nurses, or Sisters of Wards, well know what
I mean, for you have to be Ward _Mistresses_ as well as Nurses; and how
can she (the Ward Mistress) command if she has not learnt how to obey?
If she cannot enforce upon herself to obey rules with discretion, how
can she enforce upon her Ward to obey rules with discretion?


III

And of those who have to be Ward Mistresses, as well as those who are
Ward Mistresses already, or in any charge of trust or authority, I will
ask, if Sisters and Head Nurses will allow me to ask of them, as I have
so often asked of myself--

What is it that made our Lord speak “as one having authority”? What was
the key to _His_ “authority”? Is it anything which we, trying to be
“like Him,” could have--like Him?

What are the qualities which give us authority, which enable us to
exercise some charge or control over others with “authority”? It is not
the charge or position itself, for we often see persons in a position of
authority, who have no authority at all; and on the other hand we
sometimes see persons in the very humblest position who exercise a great
influence or authority on all around them.

The very first element for having control over others is, of course, to
have control over oneself. If I cannot take charge of myself, I cannot
take charge of others. The next, perhaps, is--not to try to “seem”
anything, but to _be_ what we would _seem_.

A person in charge must be felt more than she is heard--not heard more
than she is felt. She must fulfil her charge without noisy disputes, by
the silent power of a consistent life, in which there is no _seeming_,
and no hiding, but plenty of discretion. She must exercise authority
without appearing to exercise it.

A person, but more especially a woman, in charge must have a quieter and
more impartial mind than those under her, in order to influence them by
the best part of them and not by the worst.

We (Sisters) think that we must often make allowances for them, and
sometimes put ourselves in their place. And I will appeal to Sisters to
say whether we must not observe more than we speak, instead of speaking
more than we observe. We must not give an order, much less a reproof,
without being fully acquainted with both sides of the case. Else, having
scolded wrongfully, we look rather foolish.

The person in charge every one must see to be just and candid, looking
at both sides, not moved by entreaties or, by likes and dislikes, but
only by justice; and always reasonable, remembering and not forgetting
the wants of those of whom she is in charge.

She must have a keen though generous insight into the characters of
those she has to control. They must know that she _cares for_ them even
while she is checking them; or rather that she checks them _because_ she
cares for them. A woman _thus_ reproved is often made your friend for
life; a word dropped in this way by a Sister in charge (I am speaking
now solely to Sisters and Head Nurses) may sometimes show a probationer
the unspeakable importance of this year of her life, when she must sow
the seed of her future nursing in this world, and of her future life
through eternity. For although future years are of importance to train
the plant and make it come up, yet if there is no seed nothing will come
up.

Nay, I appeal again to Sisters’ own experience, whether they have not
known patients feel the same of words dropped before _them_.

We had in one of the Hospitals which we nurse a little girl patient of
seven years old, the child of a bad mother, who used to pray on her
knees (when she did not know she was heard) her own little prayer that
she might not forget, when she went away to what she already knew to be
a bad life, the good words she had been taught. (In this great London,
the time that children spend in Hospital is sometimes the only time in
their lives that they hear good words.) And sometimes we have had
patients, widows of journeymen for instance, who had striven to the last
to do for their children and place them all out in service or at work,
die in our Hospitals, thanking God that they had had this time to
collect their thoughts before death, and to die “so comfortably” as they
expressed it.

But, if a Ward is not kept in such a spirit that patients can collect
their thoughts, whether it is for life or for death, and that children
can hear good words, of course these things will not happen.

Ward management is only made possible by kindness and sympathy. And the
mere way in which a thing is said or done to patient, or probationer,
makes all the difference. In a Ward, too, where there is no _order_
there can be no “authority”; there must be noise and dispute.

Hospital Sisters are the only women who may be in charge really of men.
Is this not enough to show how essential to them are those qualities
which alone constitute real authority?

Never to have a quarrel with another; never to say things which rankle
in another’s mind; never when we are uncomfortable ourselves to make
others uncomfortable--for quarrels come out of such very small matters,
a hasty word, a sharp joke, a harsh order: without regard to these
things, how can we take charge?

We may say, so-and-so is too weak if she minds that. But, pray, are we
not weak in the same way ourselves?

I have been in positions of authority myself and have always tried to
remember that to use such an advantage inconsiderately is--cowardly. To
be sharp upon them is worse in me than in them to be sharp upon me. No
one can trample upon others, and govern them. To win them is half, I
might say the whole, secret of “having charge.” If you find your way to
their hearts, you may do what you like with them; and that authority is
the most complete which is least perceived or asserted.

The world, whether of a Ward or of an Empire, is governed not by many
words but by few; though some, especially women, seem to expect to
govern by many words--by talk, and nothing else.

There is scarcely anything which interferes so much with charge over
others as rash and inconsiderate talking, or as wearing one’s thoughts
on one’s cap. There is scarcely anything which interferes so much with
their respect for us as any want of simplicity in us. A person who is
always thinking of herself--how she looks, what effect she produces upon
others, what others will think or say of her--can scarcely ever hope to
have charge of them to any purpose.

We ought to be what we want to seem, or those under us will find out
very soon that we only seem what we ought to be.

If we think only of the duty we have in hand, we may hope to make the
others think of it too. But if we are fidgety or uneasy about trifles,
can we hope to impress them with the importance of essential things?

There is so much talk about persons now-a-days. Everybody criticises
everybody. Everybody seems liable to be drawn into a current, against
somebody, or in favour of every one doing what she likes, pleasing
herself, or getting promotion.

If any one gives way to all these distractions, and has no root of
calmness in herself, she will not find it in any Hospital or Home.

“All this is as old as the hills,” you will say. Yes, it is as old as
Christianity; and is not that the more reason for us to begin to
practise it to-day? “_To-day_, if ye will hear my voice,” says the
Father; “_To-day_ ye shall be with me in Paradise,” says the Son; and He
does not say this only to the dying; for Heaven may begin here, and “The
kingdom of heaven is within,” He tells us.

Most of you here present will be in a few years in charge of others,
filling posts of responsibility. _All_ are on the threshold of active
life. Then our characters will be put to the test, whether in some
position of charge or of subordination, or both. Shall we be found
wanting? Unable to control ourselves, therefore unable to control
others? With many good qualities, perhaps, but owing to selfishness,
conceit, to some want of purpose, some laxness, carelessness, lightness,
vanity, some temper, habits of self-indulgence, or want of
disinterestedness, unequal to the struggle of life, the business of
life, and ill-adapted to the employment of Nursing, which we have chosen
for ourselves, and which, almost above all others, requires earnest
purpose, and the reverse of all these faults? Thirty years hence, if we
could suppose us all standing here again passing judgment on ourselves,
and telling sincerely why one has succeeded and another has failed; why
the life of one has been a blessing to those she has charge of, and
another has gone from one thing to another, pleasing herself, and
bringing nothing to good--what would we give to be able _now_ to see all
this before us?

Yet some of those reasons for failure or success we may anticipate now.
Because so-and-so was or was not weak or vain; because she could or
could not make herself respected; because she had no steadfastness in
her, or on the contrary because she had a fixed and steady purpose;
because she was selfish or unselfish, disliked or beloved; because she
could or could not keep her women together or manage her patients, or
was or was not to be trusted in Ward business. And there are many other
reasons which I might give you, or which you might give yourselves, for
the success or failure of those who have passed through this Training
School for the last eleven years.

Can we not see ourselves as others see us?

For the “world is a hard schoolmaster,” and punishes us without giving
reasons, and much more severely than any Training School can, and when
we can no longer perhaps correct the defect.

Good posts may be found for us; but can we keep them so as to fill them
worthily? Or are we but unprofitable servants in fulfilling any charge?

Yet many of us are blinded to the truth by our own self-love even to the
end. And we attribute to accident or ill-luck what is really the
consequence of some weakness or error in ourselves.

But “can we not see ourselves as God sees us?” is a still more important
question. For while we value the judgments of our superiors, and of our
fellows, which may correct our own judgments, we must also have a higher
standard which may correct theirs. We cannot altogether trust them, and
still less can we trust ourselves. And we know, of course, that the
worth of a life is not altogether measured by failure or success. We
want to see our purposes, and the ways we take to fulfil such charge as
may be given us, as they are in the sight of God. “Thou God seest me.”

And thus do we return to the question we asked before--how near can we
come to Him whose name we bear, when we call ourselves Christians? How
near to His gentleness and goodness--to His “authority” over others.[4]

And the highest “authority” which a woman especially can attain among
her fellow women must come from her doing God’s work here in the same
spirit, and with the same thoroughness, that Christ did, though we
follow him but “afar off.”


IV

Lastly, it is charity to nurse sick bodies well; it is greater charity
to nurse well and patiently sick minds, tiresome sufferers. But there is
a greater charity even than these: to do good to those who are not good
to us, to behave well to those who behave ill to us, to serve with love
those who do not even receive our service with good temper, to forgive
on the instant any slight which we may have received, or may have
fancied we have received, or any worse injury.

If we cannot “do good” to those who “persecute” us--for we are not
“persecuted”: if we cannot pray “Father, forgive them, for they know not
what they do”--for none are nailing us to a cross: how much more must we
try to serve with patience and love any who use us spitefully, to nurse
with all our hearts any thankless peevish patients!

We Nurses may well call ourselves “blessed among women” in this, that we
can be always exercising all these three charities, and so fulfil the
work our God has given us to do.

Just as I was writing this came a letter from Mrs. Beecher Stowe, who
wrote _Uncle Tom’s Cabin_. She has so fallen in love with the character
of our Agnes Jones (“Una”)[5] which she had just read, that she asks
about the progress of our work, supposing that we have many more Unas.
They wish to “organise a similar movement” in America--a “movement” of
Unas--what a great thing that would be! Shall we all try to be Unas?

She ends, as I wish to end,--“Yours, in the dear name that is above
every other,”

FLORENCE NIGHTINGALE.




II


_May 23, 1873._

MY DEAR FRIENDS,--Another year has passed over us. Nearly though not
quite all of us who were here at this time last year have gone their
several ways, to their several posts; some at St. Thomas’, some to
Edinburgh, some to Highgate. Nearly all are, I am thankful to say, well,
and I hope we may say happy. Some are gone altogether.

May this year have set us all one step farther, one year on our way to
becoming “perfect as our Father in Heaven is perfect,” as it ought to
have done.

Some differences have been made in the School by our good Matron, who
toils for us early and late--to bring us on the way, we hope, towards
becoming “perfect.”

These differences--I leave it to you to say, improvements--are as you
see: our new Medical Instructor having vigorously taken us in hand and
giving us his invaluable teaching (1) in Medical and Surgical Nursing,
(2) in the elements of Anatomy. I need not say: Let us profit.

Next, in order to give more time and leisure to less tired bodies, the
Special Probationers have two afternoons in the week off duty for the
course of reading which our able Medical Instructor has laid down. And
the Nurse-Probationers have all one morning and one afternoon in the
week to improve themselves, in which our kind Home Sister assists them
by classes. And, again, I need not say how important it is to take the
utmost advantage of this. Do not let the world move on and leave us in
the wrong. Now that, by the law of the land, every child between five
and thirteen must be at school, it will be a poor tale, indeed, in their
after life for Nurses who cannot read, write, spell, and cypher well and
correctly, and read aloud easily, and take notes of the temperature of
cases, and the like. Only this last week, I was told by one of our own
Matrons of an excellent Nurse of her own to whom she would have given a
good place, only that she could neither read nor write well enough for
it.

And may I tell you, not for envy, but for a generous rivalry, that you
will have to work hard if you wish St. Thomas’ Training School to hold
its own with other Schools rising up.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let us be on our guard against the danger, not exactly of thinking too
well of ourselves (for no one consciously does this), but of isolating
ourselves, of falling into party spirit--always remembering that, if we
can do any good to others, we must draw others to us by the influence of
our characters, and not by any profession of what we are--least of all,
by a profession of Religion.

And this, by the way, applies peculiarly to what we are with our
patients. Least of all should a _woman_ try to exercise religious
influence with her patients, as it were, by a ministry, a chaplaincy. We
are not chaplains. It is what she _is_ in _herself_, and what comes out
of herself, out of what she _is_--that exercise a moral or religious
influence over her patients. No set form of words is of any use. And
patients are so quick to see whether a Nurse is consistent always in
herself--whether she _is_ what she _says_ to them. And if she is not, it
is no use. _If she is_, of how much use, unawares to herself, may the
simplest word of soothing, of comfort, or even of reproof--especially in
the quiet night--be to the roughest patient, who is there from drink, or
to the still innocent child, or to the anxious toil-worn mother or
husband! But if she wishes to do this, she must keep up a sort of divine
calm and high sense of duty in her own mind. Christ was alone, from time
to time, in the wilderness or on mountains. If _He_ needed this, how
much more must we?

Quiet in our own rooms (and a room of your own is specially provided for
each one here); a few minutes of calm thought to offer up the day to
God: how indispensable it is, in this ever increasing hurry of life!
When we live “so fast,” do we not require a breathing time, a moment or
two daily, to think where we are going? At this time, especially, when
we are laying the foundation of our after life, in reality the most
important time of all.

       *       *       *       *       *

And I am not at all saying that our patients have everything to learn
from _us_. On the contrary, we can, many a time, learn from them, in
patience, in true religious feeling and hope. One of our Sisters told me
that she had often learnt more from her patients than from any one else.
And I am sure I can say the same for myself. The poorest, the meanest,
the humblest patient may enter into the kingdom of Heaven before the
cleverest of us, or the most conceited. For, in another world, many,
many of the conditions of this world must be changed. Do we think of
this?

       *       *       *       *       *

We have been, almost all of us, taught to pray in the days of our
childhood. Is there not something sad and strange in our throwing this
aside when most required by us, on the threshold of our active lives?
Life is a shallow thing, and more especially _Hospital_ life, without
any depth of religion. For it is a matter of simple experience that the
best things, the things which seem as if they most would make us feel,
become the most hardening if not rightly used.

And may I say a thing from my own experience? No training is of any use,
unless one can learn (1) to feel, and (2) to think out things for
oneself. And if we have not true religious feeling and purpose, Hospital
life--the highest of all things _with_ these--_without_ them becomes a
mere routine and bustle, and a very hardening routine and bustle.

One of our past Probationers said: “Our work must be the first thing,
but God must be in it.” “And He is not in it,” she added. But let us
hope that this is not so. I am sure it was not so with _her_. Let us try
to make it not so with any of us.

There are three things which one must have to prevent this degeneration
in oneself. And let each one of us, from time to time, tell, not any one
else, but herself, whether she has these less or more than when she
began her training here.

One is the real, deep, religious feeling and strong, personal, motherly
interest for each one of our patients. And you can see this motherly
interest in girls of twenty-one--we have had Sisters of not more than
that age who had it--and _not_ see it in women of forty.

The second is a strong practical (intellectual, if you will) interest in
the _case_, how it is going on. This is what makes the true Nurse.
Otherwise the patients might as well be pieces of furniture, and we the
housemaids, unless we see how interesting a thing Nursing is. This is
what makes us urge you to begin to observe the very first case you see.

The third is the pleasures of administration, which, though a fine word,
means only learning to manage a Ward well: to keep it fresh, clean,
tidy; to keep up its good order, punctuality; to report your cases with
absolute accuracy to the Surgeon or Physician, and first to report them
to the Sister; and to do all that is contained in the one word,
Ward-management: to keep wine-lists, diet-lists, washing-lists--that is
Sister’s work--and to do all the things no less important which
constitute Nurse’s work.

But it would take a whole book for me to count up these; and I am going
back to the first thing that we were saying: without deep religious
purpose how shallow a thing is Hospital life, which is, or ought to be,
the most inspiring! For, as years go on, we shall have others to train;
and find that the springs of religion are dried up within ourselves. The
patients we shall always have with us while we are Nurses. And we shall
find that we have no religious gift or influence with them, no word in
season, whether for those who are to live, or for those who are to die,
no, not even when they are in their last hours, and perhaps no one by
but _us_ to speak a word to point them to the Eternal Father and
Saviour; not even for a poor little dying child who cries: “Nursey, tell
me, oh, why is it so dark?” Then we may feel painfully about them what
we do not at present feel about ourselves. We may wish, both for our
patients and Probationers, that they had the restraints of the “fear” of
the most Holy God, to enable them to resist the temptation. We may
regret that our own Probationers seem so worldly and external. And we
may perceive too late that the deficiency in their characters began in
our own.

For, to all good women, _life_ is a prayer; and though we pray in our
own rooms, in the Wards and at Church, the end must not be confounded
with the means. We are the more bound to watch strictly over ourselves;
we have not less but more need of a high standard of duty and of life in
our Nursing; we must teach ourselves humility and modesty by becoming
more aware of our own weakness and narrowness, and liability to mistake
as Nurses and as Christians. Mere worldly success to any nobler, higher
mind is not worth having. Do you think Agnes Jones, or some who are now
living amongst us, cared much about worldly success? They cared about
efficiency, thoroughness. But that is a different thing.

We must condemn many of our own tempers when we calmly review them. We
must lament over training opportunities which we have lost, must desire
to become better women, better Nurses. That we all of us must feel. And
then, and not till then, will _life_ and _work_ among the sick become a
prayer.

For prayer is communion or co-operation with God: the expression of a
_life_ among his poor and sick and erring ones. But when we speak with
God, our power of addressing Him, of holding communion with Him, and
listening to His still small voice, depends upon our will being one and
the same with His. _Is_ He our God, as He was Christ’s? To Christ He was
all, to us He seems sometimes nothing. Can we retire to rest after our
busy, anxious day in the Wards, with the feeling: “Lord, into Thy hands
I commend my spirit,” and those of such and such anxious cases;
remembering, too, that in the darkness, “Thou God seest me,” and seest
them too? Can we rise in the morning, almost with a feeling of joy that
we are spared another day to do Him service with His sick?--

    Awake, my soul, and with the sun,
    Thy daily stage of duty run.

Does the thought ever occur to us in the course of the day, that we will
correct that particular fault of mind, or heart, or temper, whether
slowness, or bustle, or want of accuracy or method, or harsh judgments,
or want of loyalty to those under whom or among whom we are placed, or
sharp talking, or tale-bearing or gossiping--oh, how common, and how old
a fault, as old as Solomon! “He that repeateth a matter, separateth
friends;” and how can people trust us unless they know that we are not
tale-bearers, who will misrepresent or improperly repeat what is said to
us? Shall we correct this, or any other fault, not with a view to our
success in life, or to our own credit, but in order that we may be able
to serve our Master better in the service of the sick? Or do we ever
seek to carry on the battle against light behaviour, against
self-indulgence, against evil tempers (the “world,” the “flesh,” and the
“devil”), and the temptations that beset us; conscious that in ourselves
we are weak, but that there is a strength greater than our own, “which
is perfected in weakness”? Do we think of God as the Eternal, into whose
hands our patients, whom we see dying in the Wards, must resign their
souls--into whose hands we must resign our own when we depart hence, and
ought to resign our own as entirely every morning and night of our lives
here; with whom do live the spirits of the just made perfect, with whom
do really live, _ought_ really as much to live, our spirits here, and
who, in the hour of death, in the hour of life, both for our patients
and ourselves, must be our trust and hope? We would not always be
thinking of death, for “we must live before we die,” and life, perhaps,
is as difficult as death. Yet the thought of a time when we shall have
passed out of the sight and memory of men may also help us to live; may
assist us in shaking off the load of tempers, jealousies, prejudices,
bitternesses, interests which weigh us down; may teach us to rise out of
this busy, bustling Hospital world, into the clearer light of God’s
Kingdom, of which, indeed, this Home is or might be a part, and
certainly and especially this Hospital.

This is the spirit of prayer, the spirit of conversation or communion
with God, which leads us in all our Nursing silently to think of Him,
and refer it to Him. When we hear in the voice of conscience _His_ voice
speaking to us; when we are aware that He is the witness of everything
we do, and say, and think, and also the source of every good thing in
us; and when we feel in our hearts the struggle against some evil
temper, then God is fighting _with_ us against envy and jealousy,
against selfishness and self-indulgence, against lightness, and
frivolity, and vanity, for “our better self against our worse self.”

And thus, too, the friendships which have begun at this School may last
through life, and be a help and strength to us. For may we not regard
the opportunity given for acquiring friends as one of the uses of this
place? and Christian friendship, in uniting us to a friend, as uniting
us at the same time to Christ and God? Christ called His disciples
friends, adding the reason, “because He had told them all that He had
heard of the Father,” just as women tell their whole mind to their
friends.

But we all know that there are dangers and disappointments in
friendships, especially in women’s friendships, as well as joys and
sorrows. A woman may have an honourable desire to know those who are her
superiors in education, in the School, or in Nursing. Or she may allow
herself to drop into the society of those beneath her, perhaps because
she is more at home with them, and is proud or shy with her superiors.
We do not want to be judges of our fellow-women (for who made thee to
differ from another?), but neither can we leave entirely to chance one
of the greatest interests of human life.

True friendship is simple, womanly, unreserved: not weak, or silly, or
fond, or noisy, or romping, or extravagant, nor yet jealous and selfish,
and exacting more than woman’s nature can fairly give, for there are
other ties which bind women to one another besides friendship; nor,
again, intrusive into the secrets of another woman, or curious about
her circumstances; rejoicing in the presence of a friend, and not
forgetting her in her absence.

Two Probationers or Nurses going together have not only a twofold, but a
fourfold strength, if they learn knowledge or good from one another; if
they form the characters of one another; if they support one another in
fulfilling the duties and bearing the troubles of a Nursing life, if
their friendship thus becomes fellow-service to God in their daily work.
They may sometimes rejoice together over the portion of their training
which has been accomplished, and take counsel about what remains to be
done. They will desire to keep one another up to the mark; not to allow
idleness or eccentricity to spoil their time of training.

But some of our youthful friendships are too violent to last: they have
in them something of weakness or sentimentalism; the feeling passes
away, and we become ashamed of them. Or at some critical time a friend
has failed to stand by us, and then it is useless to talk of “auld lang
syne.” Only still let us remember that there are duties which we owe to
the “extinct” friend (who perhaps on some fanciful ground has parted
company from us), that we should never speak against her, or make use
of our knowledge about her. For the memory of a friendship is like the
memory of a dead friend, not lightly to be spoken of.

And then there is the “Christian or ideal friendship.” What others
regard as the service of the sick she may recognise as also the service
of God; what others do out of compassion for their maimed
fellow-creatures she may do also for the love of Christ. Feeling that
God has made her what she is, she may seek to carry on her work in the
Hospital as a fellow-worker with God. Remembering that Christ died for
her, she may be ready to lay down her life for her patients.

“They walked together in the house of God as friends”--that is, they
served God together in doing good to His sick. For if ever a place may
be called the “house of God,” it is a Hospital, if it be what it should
be. And in old times it _was_ called the “house” or the “hotel” of God.
The greatest and oldest Central Hospital of Paris, where is the
Mother-house of the principal Order of Nursing Sisters, is to this day
called the Hôtel Dieu, the “House of God.”

There may be some amongst us who, like St. Paul, are capable
of feeling a natural interest in the spiritual welfare of our
fellow-probationers--or, if you like the expression better, in the
improvement of their characters--that they may become more such as God
intended them to be in this Hospital and Home. For “Christian friendship
is not merely the friendship of equals, but of unequals”--the love of
the weak and of those who can make no return, like the love of God
towards the unthankful and the evil. It is not a friendship of one or
two but of many. It proceeds upon a different rule: “Love your enemies.”
It is founded upon that charity “which is not easily offended, which
beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth
all things.” Such a friendship we may be hardly able to reconcile either
with our own character or with common prudence. Yet this is the
“Christian ideal in the Gospel.” And here and there may be found some
one who has been inspired to carry out the ideal in practice.

“To live in isolation is to be weak and unhappy--perhaps to be idle and
selfish.” There is something not quite right in a woman who shuts up her
heart from other women.

This may seem to be telling you what you already know, and bidding you
do what you are already doing. Well, then, shall we put the matter
another way? Make such friendships as you will look back upon with
pleasure in later life, and be loyal and true to your friends, not going
from one to another.

    The friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
    Grapple them to thy soul with hooks of steel;
    But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
    Of each new-hatched, unfledged comrade.

And do not expect more of them than friends can give, or weary them with
demands for sympathy; and do not let the womanliness of friendship be
impaired by any silliness or sentimentalism; or allow hearty and genial
good-will to degenerate into vulgarity and noise.

And as was once truly said, friendship perhaps appears best, as it did
in St. Paul, in his manner of rebuking those who had erred,
“transferring their faults in a figure to Apollos and to himself.” “No
one knew how to speak the truth in love like him.”

It has been said of Romans xii.: “What rule of manners can be better
than this chapter?” “She that giveth, let her do it with simplicity”;
that is, let us do our acts of Nursing and kindness as if we did not
make much of them, as unto the Lord and not to men. “Like-minded one
towards another”; that is, we should have the same thoughts and feelings
with others. “Rejoicing with them that rejoice, and weeping with them
that weep”; going out of ourselves and entering into the thoughts of
others.

And have we St. Paul’s extraordinary regard for the feelings of others?
He was never too busy to think of these. “If meat make my brother to
offend, I will eat no more meat while the world standeth,” he says,
though he well knew such scruples were really superstitions. If the
spirit of these words could find a way to our women’s hearts, we might
be able to say, “See how these Christians (Nurses) love one another!”

Then the courtesy we owe, one woman to another: “for the happiness and
the good” of our work and our School is not simply “made up of great
duties and virtues, nor the evil of the opposite.” But both seem to
consist also in a number of small particulars, which, small as they are,
have a great effect on the tone and character of our School, introducing
light or darkness into the “Home,” sweetness or bitterness into our
intercourse with one another.

And, as to our Wards: Christ, we may be sure, did not lose authority, or
dignity and refinement, “even in the company of publicans and harlots,”
just as we may observe in the Wards, that there are a few of us whose
very refinement makes them do the coarsest and roughest things there
with simplicity. A Sister of ours once remarked this of one of her
Probationers (who was not a lady in the common sense of the word, but
she was the truest gentlewoman in Christ’s sense), that she was too
refined (most people would have said, to do the indelicate work of the
Wards, but _she_ said) to see indelicacy in doing the nastiest thing;
and so did it all well, without thinking of herself, or that men’s eyes
were upon her. That is real dignity--the dignity which Christ had--on
which no man can intrude, yet combined with the greatest gentleness and
simplicity of life.


II

And let me say a word about self-denial: because, as we all know, there
can be no real Nursing without self-denial. We know the story of the
Roman soldier, above fourteen hundred years ago, who, entering a town in
France with his regiment, saw a sick man perishing with cold by the
wayside--there were no Hospitals then--and, having nothing else to
give, drew his sword, cut his own cloak in half, and wrapped the sick
man in half his cloak.

It is said that a dream visited him, in which he found himself admitted
into heaven, and Christ saying, “Martin hath clothed me with this
garment”: the dream, of course, being a remembrance of the verse, “When
saw we thee sick or in prison, and came unto thee?” and of the answer,
“Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren,
ye have done it unto me.” But whether the story of the dream be true or
not, this Roman soldier, converted to Christianity, became afterwards
one of the greatest bishops of the early ages, Martin of Tours.

_We_ are not called upon to feed our patients with our own dinners, or
to dress them with our own clothes. We are comfortable, and cannot make
ourselves uncomfortable on purpose. But we can learn Sick Cookery for
our Patients, we can give up spending our money in foolish dressy ways,
and thus squandering what we ought to lay by for ourselves or our
families.

On one of the severest winter days in the late war between France and
Germany, an immense detachment, many thousands, of wretched French
prisoners were passing through the poorest streets of one of the largest
and poorest German towns on the way to the prisoners’ camp. Every door
in this poor “East End” opened; not one remained closed; and out of
every door came a poor German woman, carrying in her hand the dinner or
supper she was cooking for herself, her husband, or children; often all
she had in the house was in her hands. And this she crammed into the
hands of the most sickly-looking prisoner as he passed by, often into
his mouth, as he sank down exhausted in the muddy street. And the
good-natured German escort, whose business it was to bring these poor
French to their prison, turned away their heads, and let the women have
their way, though it was late, and they were weary too. Before the
prisoners had been the first hour in their prison, six had lain down in
the straw and died. But how many lives had been saved that night by the
timely food of these good women, giving all they had, not of their
abundance, but of their poverty, God only knows, not we. This was told
by an Englishman who was by and saw it; one of our own “Aid Committee.”

And at a large German station, which almost all the prisoners’ trains
passed through, a lady went every night during all that long, long,
dreadful winter, and for the whole night, to feed, and warm, and
comfort, and often to receive the last dying words of the miserable
French prisoners, as they arrived in open trucks, some frozen to the
bottom, some only as the dead, others to die in the station, all
half-clad and starving. Some had been nine days and nights in these open
trucks; many had been twenty-four hours without food. Night after night
as these long, terrible trainsful dragged their slow length into the
station, she kneeled on its pavement, supporting the dying heads,
receiving their last messages to their mothers; pouring wine or hot milk
down the throats of the sick; dressing the frost-bitten limbs; and,
thank God, saving many. Many were carried to the prisoners’ hospital in
the town, of whom about two-thirds recovered. Every bit of linen she had
went in this way. She herself contracted incurable ill-health during
these fearful nights. But thousands were saved by her means.

She is my friend.[6] She came and saw me here after this; and it is from
her lips I heard the story. Smallpox and typhus raged among the
prisoners, most of whom were quite boys. Many were wounded; half were
frost-bitten. Sometimes they would snatch at all she brought; but
sometimes they would turn away their dying heads from the tempting hot
wine, and gasp out, “Thank you, madam; give it to _him_, who wants it
more than I.” Or, “I’m past help; love to mother.”

_We_ have not to give of our own to _our_ sick. But shall we the less
give them our all--that is, all our hearts and minds? and reasonable
service?

Suppose we dedicated this “School” to Him, to the Divine Charity and
Love which said, “Inasmuch as ye do it unto one of the least of these my
brethren” (and He calls all our patients--all of us, His brothers and
sisters) “ye do it unto me”--oh, what a “Kingdom of Heaven” this might
be! Then, indeed, the dream of Martin of Tours, the soldier and
Missionary-Bishop, would have come true!


III

May I take this opportunity of saying what I think really very much
concerns us? First of all, that you have, or might have, directly and
indirectly, a great deal to do with maintaining a supply of good
candidates to this School. You know whether you have been happy here or
not; you know whether you have had opportunities given you here of
training and self-improvement. Many, very many of our old Matrons and
Nurses have told me that their time as probationers with us was “the
happiest time of their lives.” It _might_ be so with all, though perhaps
all do not think so now.

It is in your power to assist the School most materially in obtaining
fresh and worthy recruits. There is hardly one of you who has not
friends or acquaintances of her own. You _ought_ to advertise us. We
ought not to have to put one advertisement in the newspapers. If you
think this is a worthy life, why do you not bring others to it? I tried
to do my part. When Agnes Jones died, though my heart was breaking, I
put an article in _Good Words_, such as I knew she would have wished, in
all but the mention of herself; and for years her dear memory brought
aspirants to the work in our Schools, or others’ Schools.

To reform the Nursing of all the Hospitals and Workhouse Infirmaries in
the world, and to establish District Nursing among the sick poor at
home, too, as at Liverpool--is this not an object most worthy of the
co-operation of all civilised people?

In the last ten years, thank God, numerous Training Schools for Nurses
have grown up, resolved to unite in putting a stop to such a thing as
drunken, immoral, and inefficient Nursing. But all make the same
complaint; while the outcry of “employment for women” continues, why
does not this most womanly employment for all good women become more
sought after? I hope to hear that my old friends in St. Thomas’ have
each done their part; and I feel quite sure that if it is once placed
before them, as a thing they ought to do, they will be found in the
front.

You who are assembled in this room, and who are each connected with some
circle, directly or indirectly, may do a good work for the civilisation
of the Workhouses and Hospitals of the world. If you inform yourselves
on the subject, and if you set yourselves to work, to deal with it, as
we do with any other great evil that tortures helpless people, you will
be able to act directly upon your friends outside, and ultimately get up
an amount of public opinion among women capable of becoming Nurses,
which will be of the greatest possible aid to our efforts in improving
Hospital and Workhouse Nursing. Every one can help--every one--better
than if she were a “newspaper,” better than if she were a “public
meeting.” I believe that within a few years you can make it a thing that
will be a disgrace to any Hospital or even Workhouse to be suspected of
bad Nursing, or to any district (in towns, at any rate) not to have a
good District Nurse to nurse the sick poor at home.

Those who have made the right use of all the training that came in their
way in this School, if they would write to their own homes for the
information of their friends outside, an immense help on its way could
be given to the work we have all so much at heart. And I look upon it as
a certainty that you will each be able, in one way or another, whether
purposely or almost unconsciously, to take a great part in reforming the
Hospital and Workhouse Nursing systems of our country, perhaps of our
colonies and dependencies, and perhaps of the world.


IV

May I pay ourselves even the least little compliment, as to our being a
little less conceited than last year? Were we not as conceited in 1872
as it was possible to be? You shall tell. Are we, in 1873, rather less
so? And, without having any one particularly in my head--for what I am
going to ask is in fact a truism--is not our conceit always in exact
proportion to our ignorance? For those who really know something know
how little it is.

Would that this could be a “secret” among us! But, unfortunately, is not
our name “up” and “abroad” for conceit? And has it not even been said
(“tell it not in Gath”): “And these conceited ‘Nightingale’ women
scarcely know how to read and write?”

Now let no one look to see our blushes. But shall we not get rid of this
which makes us ridiculous as fast as we can?

But enough of this joke; let us be serious, remembering that the
greatest trust which is committed to any woman of us all is, _herself_;
and that she is living in the presence of God as well as of her
fellow-women.

To know whether we know our Nursing business or not is a great result
of training; and to think that we know it when we do _not_ is as great a
proof of want of training.

The world, more especially the Hospital world, is in such a hurry, is
moving so fast, that it is too easy to slide into bad habits before we
are aware. And it is easier still to let our year’s training slip away
without forming any real plan of training ourselves.

For, after all, all that any training is to do for us is: to teach us
how to train ourselves, how to observe for ourselves, how to think out
things for ourselves. Don’t let us allow the first week, the second
week, the third week to pass by--I will not say in idleness, but in
bustle. Begin, for instance, at once making notes of your cases. From
the first moment you see a case, you can observe it. Nay, it is one of
the first things a Nurse is strictly called upon to do: to observe her
sick. Mr. Croft has taught you how to take notes; and you have now,
every one of you, two leisure times a week to work up your notes.

But give but one-quarter of an hour a _day_ to jot down, even in words
which no one can understand but yourself, the progress or change of two
or three individual cases, not to forget or confuse them. You can then
write them out at your two leisure times. To those who have not much
education, I am sure that our kind Home Sister, or the Special
Probationer in the same Ward, or nearest in any way, will give help. The
race is not always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong; and “line
upon line”--_one_ line every day--in the steady, observing, humble Nurse
has often won the race over the smarter “genius” in what constitutes
real Nursing. But few of us women seriously think of improving our own
mind or character _every day_. And this is fatal to our improving in
Nursing. We do not calculate the future by our experience of the past.
What right have we to expect that, if we have not improved during the
last six months, we shall during the next six? Then, we do not allow for
the changes which circumstances make in us--the being put on Staff duty,
when we certainly shall not have more time, but less, for improving
ourselves, or the growing older or more feeble in health. We believe
that we shall always have the same powers or opportunities for learning
our business which we now have. Our time of training slips away in this
unimproving manner. And when a woman begins to see how many things might
have been better in her, she is too old to change, or it is too late,
too late. And she confesses to herself, or oftener she does not
confess--“How all her life she had been in the wrong.”

We are all of us, as we believe, passing into an unknown world, of which
this is only a part. We have been here a year, or part of a year. What
are we making of our own lives? Are we where we were a year ago? Or are
we fitter for that work of after-life which we have undertaken?

Do our faults, and weaknesses, and vanities, tend to diminish? Or are we
still listless, inefficient, slow, bustling, conceited, unkind, hard
judges of others, instead of helping them where we can? There is no
greater softener of hard judgments than is the trying to help the person
whom we so judge, as I can tell from my own experience; and in this you
will tell me whether we have been deficient to each other. There is a
true story told of Captain Marryat when a boy; that he jumped overboard
to save an older midshipman who had made the boy’s life a misery to him
by his filthy cruelties. And the boy Marryat wrote home to his mother
“that he loved this midshipman now--and wasn’t it lucky that his life
was saved--even better than his own darling mother.”

Do we keep before our minds constantly the sense of our duty here, of
our duty to others--Nurses, Sisters, Matron--as well as to ourselves,
our fellow Probationers, and our Home Sister, and to the whole School of
which we are members?

If we thought of this more, we might hope to attain that quiet mind and
self-control, which is the “liberty” spoken of by St. Paul. We might
learn how truly to use and enjoy both our fellow Probationers, and this
Home and our School, if we were more anxious about following the example
of Christ than about the opinion of our “world.” “We are the ‘world,’
which we often seem to think includes every one but _us_.”

But few comparatively have the power of disengaging themselves, even in
thought, from those about them. They take the view of their own set. If
it is the fashion to conceal, they conceal; if to carry tales, they
carry tales. There are a few who never allow themselves to speak against
others, and exercise such a kind of authority as to prevent others being
spoken against in their hearing. These are the “peacemakers” of whom
Christ speaks. These are they who keep a Home or Institution together,
and seem more than any others in this our little world to bear the image
of Christ until His coming again.
